JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a sexual
assault scandal that has rocked
Baylor University, and ignited
questions over whether
the university ignored
the complaints of victims.
The school confirmed in
recent days that it is
also the subject of an
ongoing NCAA investigation.
That's the focus of our weekly
segment Making the Grade.
John Yang has the latest.
JOHN YANG: More than a
dozen women have filed
lawsuits against Baylor,
the country's largest
Baptist university, saying the
school ignored or mishandled
their claims going back several
years.
The school's Board of
Regents has acknowledged
that 19 football players
were accused of criminal,
sexual or physical
assault at one point.
One of them, Tevin Elliot,
was convicted and sentenced
to 20 years in prison.
The head football coach,
Art Briles, was fired,
and the president, Ken
Starr, quit after he
was demoted.
Paula Lavigne is a
reporter with ESPN.
She's been investigating
the Baylor case.
She's the co-author of a
forthcoming book on the case
called "Violated: Exposing Rape
at Baylor University
Amid College Football's
Sexual Assault Crisis."
Paula, thanks for joining us.
Remind us of these allegations.
They have been around for a
while, but remind us of the
scope, how far back they go, the
nature of the
allegations at Baylor.
PAULA LAVIGNE, ESPN: Right.
The allegations go back
for more than a decade.
And right now, in court cases
alone, you have 15 different
women filing Title IX federal
lawsuits against the school
in cases involving domestic
violence, sexual assault.
But depending on who you talk
to, there are hundreds of cases.
And many of them involve
football players, but actually
this is a much larger problem.
They involve regular
students, fraternity
members, I mean, you name it.
It is a huge problem
at the school.
And another sort of interesting
layer to it is the fact that
we're talking about the world's
largest Baptist university, and
a lot of these women are saying,
you know, part of the problem
here was that the school's
Christian values really didn't
foster an environment in which
women were encouraged to come
forward or in which their
cases were taken seriously.
And you compound that on
top of the issues with the
prominent football team.
And, yes, the scope, it just
touches all aspects of higher
education and of sexual assault
on campus.
JOHN YANG: And what can the
NCAA do, and what can it
not do in cases like this?
PAULA LAVIGNE: So, that's
a really good question.
So, a lot of people -- if
you're not familiar with college
sports, it's important to know
that the NCAA is sort of
the arbiter over amateur
college athletics, right?
And their purpose is to
ensure fair competition
and amateurism, OK?
So, a lot of people think
They want the NCAA to
do something about this.
Right?
There is a huge call for
the NCAA to address this.
But the issue is
that sexual violence,
addressing sexual violence,
addressing just criminal
behavior on behalf of athletes
really isn't something that's
technically in the NCAA's
wheelhouse.
And so for people to
understand what their
scope is, it's important
to understand a particular
term that the NCAA uses,
which is extra benefit, OK?
So, and when we think of extra
benefits, we often think of
student athletes being given
money from boosters or fancy
cars or allowed to basically
skate on a class, OK?
The NCAA, in this case, for
people who are - - people on
the outside who are familiar
with the investigation and
people who are familiar with
the NCAA are saying, well, one
way they can get enforcement in
a case involving sexual violence
is to say, OK, are these student
athletes getting an extra
benefit if they are being
diverted from judicial affairs,
if they are getting a pass
from local law enforcement,
if coaches or administrators
are hooking them up with legal
counsel and maybe they're not
paying what a regular student
would be paying for that legal
counsel, all of those sort of
things that a regular student
might -- who gets in trouble
might not be afforded?
They're saying, well, maybe the
NCAA can consider that an extra
benefit, and, in that sense,
it could come in and take
some enforcement action.
JOHN YANG: The issue of sexual
assaults on - - sexual violence
on college campuses has
gotten a lot of discussion.
Talk about sort of the bigger
issue here of how colleges
even outside athletic programs
are dealing with that.
PAULA LAVIGNE: It
is a huge issue.
There's been statistics that
have been backed up by numerous
research that one in five women
will experience some
sort of type of sexual
assault while in college.
And right now, there's more than
200 colleges and universities
under investigation by the
U.S. Department of Education.
However, this is a perfect
time to be talking about
this, because a lot of
the federal government's
civil rights enforcement
actions are being called into
question right now, and one of
those deals specifically
with Title IX.
And Title IX is the venue that
the U.S. Department of Education
uses to enforce how colleges
and universities are
addressing sexual violence.
And there are a lot of people
who are saying schools shouldn't
be involved in what is seen
as a criminal matter.
And a problem with that is that
that's pretty short-sighted,
because Title IX does a lot
more in addressing
sexual violence than just
determining whether or
not an alleged perpetrator
is responsible for the act.
I mean, one of the --
you mentioned the case
involving Tevin Elliot.
The young woman in that
case, I mean, she saw her
accused perpetrator convicted.
However, her biggest issue was
the fact that she didn't get
the counseling services, she
didn't get the
academic services.
She was basically sort
of left floundering.
She ends up dropping out,
doesn't get to pursue
her dream, and has to
transfer and move back
home.
There is nothing in the criminal
justice system that provides
that sort of remedy, and that's
what Title IX is designed to do.
It's designed to force
these schools to address
specific cases of
sexual violence, in part
to determine whether or
not someone is responsible.
But the bigger part, the part
that's often ignored, is by
providing a safe campus for
these women to attend, providing
counseling services if they
need them, providing academic
services to make them
whole again, so they can
continue their education.
JOHN YANG: Paula Lavigne
of ESPN, thanks so
much for joining us.
PAULA LAVIGNE: You're welcome.